In an oft-quoted commencement speech, David Foster Wallace analogises the invisible self-evidence of water surrounding fish to the realities so obvious we do not actively perceive or discuss them.

This analogy has been leveraged in defence of capitalist liberal democracy and its values in the face of critiques made against it from within its luxuries. Besides the arguments and counterarguments on the Western material abundance in the face of inequality and resource extraction in the Global South, individualism has been the target of countless critiques, yet it enjoys an unassailable position.

One can point out the erosion of reproductive and trans rights as curtailing of individual liberties, but these attacks operate within the liberal individualist framework - the right for an individual to deny service based on his or her beliefs, the right of an unborn individual to live; it is a debate on which liberties take primacy, not a dispute about the existence of said liberties. The omnipresence of debates in media and politics on the rights of the individual, from vaccines, to fifteen minute city furore, to gun control, reflect the hold of individualism on contemporary thought.

# If this is water, are we fish?

A growing unease with the excesses of individualism can be seen among the youth. Social media discourse is inundated with alternatives to individualistic liberal life, from posts advocating "trad life" or "anti-work" sentiments, to mockeries of common archetypes such as grindset influencers and capitalistic girl bosses.

Yet these alternatives to capitalist thinking remain highly individualistic solutions. A retreat into rural Arcady or a withdrawal from capitalist striving are both solutions on an individual scale, merely behavioural adjustments to cope with or change how one interacts with capitalism.

Why is it that critiques of liberal capitalism still assume the posture of individualism? Though capitalism and individualism both constitute part of the water that envelopes us, the tensions inherent to capitalism - the difference between the haves and have-nots, the injustices of uneven distribution, the stratification of a nominally meritocratic society based on circumstances of birth, are more easily laid bare than the flaws of individualism.

## The agency delusion

At the core of individualism is the belief that the individual has agency. That belief in  absolute agency lends itself to the opinion that the shortcomings of individualism are merely the consequence of flawed individuals. The swathes of adolescents who report having [no friends in real life](https://www.aei.org/research-products/report/the-state-of-american-friendship-change-challenges-and-loss/), high burnout figures, and narcissistic influencers and their followers are not symptomatic of the drawbacks of individualism, but merely the inevitable and necessary drawback of giving individuals the freedom of choice, including the freedom to make the wrong choice.

We also are raised to believe that that agency extends its influence far beyond the micro-scope. From a young age, we are inundated with messages of the impact of our individual actions; you can save the planet by recycling, not eating meat, or biking to school, your vote counts, maybe you will invent the Next Big Thing and change the world.

These narratives of the far-reaching potential of actions are deeply internalised. The despair of individualism is the dissonance suffered when these beliefs are challenged by reality. An awareness of systems reveals the complexity and opaqueness of the mechanisms which influence our life.

If life is a river, its course may not be set, but the rains that feed it are beyond our control. Educational attainment remains associated with [socio-economic status](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41539-022-00120-3), maternal stress during pregnancy [predicts ADHD](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2186370/), [depression](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC8641663/), [addiction](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3195272/), and other maladaptive behaviours.

Though every aspect of society is a gestalt, our individual contribution and thus our agency is diluted far more than our nominal share. Systems are so complex and opaque that a clear relationship between action and outcome is beyond our understanding. Not to mention the deception, conscious and inadvertent, involved in activist capitalism. 

Plastic waste sorted for [recycling seldom gets recycled](https://www.greenpeace.org/usa/reports/circular-claims-fall-flat-again/) and when it does get processed separately, it gets [shipped off to a third world country](https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-46518747) where it gets burned. Parallel to that, companies proudly announce that the single use packaging on their product is now made of recyclable plastic and implore consumer to contribute by recycling.

The complexity of the supply chain allows producers to [adulterate](https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/2019/10/23/chocolate-companies-say-their-cocoa-is-certified-some-farms-use-child-labor-thousands-are-protected-forests/) their certified products with raw materials provided by exploitation and environmental crime. Even in [farmers markets](https://www.cbc.ca/news/business/farmers-markets-lies-marketplace-1.4306231), wholesellers pass off factory farmed produce as locally grown. Good faith actors unwittingly purchase and integrate these products into the supply chain, contributing to the uncertainty surrounding even the existence of ethical consumer choices, let alone their viability to effect tangible change.

# Is there no alternative?

If the contradictions in individualism are apparent, why do we persist in promoting and adhering to these values unconditionally? As a nominally non-authoritarian form of government, liberal democracy depends on the voluntary participation of citizens to uphold it. Imparting individualist liberal views through education and media is a part of the soft coercion necessary to uphold government. However, does a more nuanced view on the breadth and depth of individualism necessarily mean a rejection of liberal democracy?

## Systems of exploitation

The typical exploitation we are familiar with is allo-exploitation, the exploitation of the worker by another person, higher up in the hierarchy. Think of the archetypal image of the robber baron and the factory worker. The relationship between exploiter and exploited flows in the same direction as value is extracted. Because the antagonism is clear between the two parties a coherent mass of conscious workers can form in opposition to the exploiter. Liberation entails freedom from the hierarchical exploiter.

Han Byung-Chul has identified another, more insidious form of exploitation. Auto-exploitation, the exploitation of the self by the self is the exploitation of the 21st century. The individual is the centrepiece of allo-exploitation, and it is his self-imposed duty to maximise and optimise himself. The relationship between exploiter and exploited is a loop, although the extraction of value is performed by another. There is no external coercion behind the optimisation of the worker, he simply views himself as a project and measures his worth through his achievements. A coherent mass of conscious workers has no figure to rebel against; they are their own masters. Although their capitalist boss may have extracted value from them, he never forced them to work that hard or to hone themselves. Liberation is the freedom to "be the best, most productive, hardest working version of yourself".

This system of cultural auto-exploitation is predicated upon the widespread acceptance of the individual as a project. Without a strong belief that the individual is in full control of his destiny and given the responsibility to maximise his potential (productivity), the framework for auto-exploitation collapses. [GDP per hour worked ](https://www.pewresearch.org/social-trends/2020/01/09/trends-in-income-and-wealth-inequality/) continues to increase at a rate disproportional to the [median household income](https://www.pewresearch.org/social-trends/2020/01/09/trends-in-income-and-wealth-inequality/) yet class consciousness seems to be stagnant. As far as corporations are concerned they profit doubly by promoting unconditional individualism; workers increase productivity due to "project of the self" thinking, while corporations remain blissfully safe from any coherent mass movements. Individualism allows corporations to shift the responsibility of dealing with their waste and excesses from themselves to individual action. And so it is doubly in the corporate world's interests to promote this unnuanced view of individualism and ensure it is deeply internalised.

## No salvation waiting in the wings

The most popular forms of left and right wing politics embrace individualism. Political debates are not on whether an individual liberty should be recognised, because liberties are considered to be inherent and inviolable, debates are centred around which conflicting liberties should take precedence, or the definition of the fuzzy edges of where liberty ends.

Right wing commentators level allegations of collectivism at identity politics, but reality differs. Contemporary identity politics is an individualistic political current, which takes societal issues and analyses them at the individual level. Systemic issues such as income inequality, classism, and racism are viewed by how they compound and impact an individual, with comparatively less attention given to societal solutions. In the case of the domestic labour gender gap, for example, contemporary infographic progressivism would appeal to men at an individual level to take on more work in the household, instead of trying to identify and address underlying structural causes.

Conservatism's pivot away from paternalism in the anglosphere started in earnest with the fusionism promoted by the National Review led by William F. Buckley Jr., but truly reached its zenith under the parallel governments of Thatcher and Reagan. As the founder of the National Review, William Buckley was saddled with the 